[Music]
hello I'm Adrian finigan and this is
County on the cost on ala Zer your
weekly look at the world of business and
economics this week Israel's war on Gaza
has hurt its agricultural heartlands the
nation is struggling to fill the Gap
left by Foreign workers who fled due to
the conflict also this week as
geopolitical tensions in the Middle East
escalate gold is becoming more and more
expensive but will oil also fire up plus
environmental values before paychecks
many employees are walking out of
companies that fail to commit to the
fight against climate
change food security has been at the
heart of Israel's economic policy for
decades but Israeli farmers are now
worried that the war war on Gaza could
turn their fields into Barren land
Growers can't reach their crops in the
area surrounding the strip which is
known as Israel's vegetable patch and
there's a sharp shortage of Palestinian
and foreign workers with a lack of
Pickers fruits and vegetables are left
to rot where they grew many farmers fear
the conflict could hurt the agricultural
industry for many months to come well a
survey of 389 Farmers con conducted by
the migal Galilee Research Institute
found 89% of Israeli Farmers have
experienced some damage and nearly all
of them expect more losses during the
next 3 months nearly 3ars of the farmers
face disruption to their Workforce even
in areas not close to the fighting
farmers expected a 35% drop in both
production and revenue on average but
that's projected to double in areas
close to the border with Gaza Israel's
agricultural industry has long relied
mainly on Palestinian and thae workers
but many Palestinians from the occupied
West Bank are banned from entering
Israel thousands of foreign workers fled
when the war started and Israeli drivers
Pickers machine operators and managers
have been called up for military duty
the shortfall is estimated to be more
than 30,000 workers farmers are looking
to fill the Gap with volunteers or by
hiring Israelis signon bonuses are being
offered to Israelis willing to work on
the farms and soldiers have been
mobilized to help harest crops the
government is trying to encourage
foreign workers to go back to the fields
by extending their visas and offering
them extra payments of $500 a month it's
also looking to recruit thousands of
laborers from countries including India
and Sri Lanka meanwhile the departure of
hundreds of malawians to work on Israeli
Farms has sparked a debate in the cash
trapped African country critics of the
agreement are worried about safety
measures put in place to protect
malawians as the war continues
that's despite attempts by officials in
Malawi and Israel to assuage their Fears
human rights experts have warned foreign
workers could be at risk of exploitation
as Israel scrambles to fill the labor
Gap well joining us now from London is
eel winter he's the silver vague
professor of Economics at the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem and a professor
of Economics at Lancaster University in
the UK Professor good to have you with
us before we talk about the toall that
this war is taking on the agricultural
sector in uh Israel I want to know
whether it is still a main driver of
Israel's economy how important is it to
the
country yeah agriculture in Israel is
very
important uh uh but it's not crucial as
as it was uh let's say 30 years ago uh
these days we are importing uh much more
uh uh food produce meat uh vegetables uh
fruits uh from other countries but the
uh industry is very important for um uh
for those who um uh who work in this
industry uh for those who have the farms
uh they rely on this for their lives and
uh uh the war is making it very very
difficult for them for two reasons one
is uh some some some Farms have been
evacuated because of the war well this
for for security reasons and the other
reason is that uh much of the workers
are foreign workers and many of these
foreign workers not all but many of
these foreign workers um went back
because of the war to their home
countries um Israelis citizens now it's
quite amazing phenomenon people from age
of uh 13 to uh a 90
volunteer uh to to I will do it myself
uh a few weeks uh in next few weeks uh
to work in the fields to replace those
foreign workers okay but this is not
enough Professor so the I'm sorry to
interrupt you but but time is tight here
you say that that Israel is now more
Reliant upon upon Imports I there is a
cost to that surely I mean it's more
expensive to import food than it is to
to to grow your own isn't it I mean what
what is that having a drag on the
economy not really I mean uh
surprisingly the produce that are are uh
uh made in Israel are more expensive
because of the labor costs Israel uh
Israel imports from from country where
the prices are much lower and uh you may
be surprised by uh the vegetables and
fruits that are on the market that are
from Israeli produce are more
expensive uh but uh you you you know
that now now the the the situation
especially I said especially for those
who work on the agriculture is is
difficult but I think the war when the
war ends uh uh things will recover quite
quickly you know when we're talking
about agriculture there's one more thing
that need to be said here in in relation
to the war Israel is one of the leading
countries in um in the production of
Technology agriculture
technology and uh when I think about it
I mean the the potential of Israel
helping Gaza okay uh
in boosting its
agriculture um industry is amazing I
mean this potential has been put aside
for so many years okay and my hope my
real hope is when this war
ends um the that I believe that this was
Israel is helping in agriculture many
undeveloped countries I mean uh much of
its technology as being export and
experts uh are are going to other
countries to to teach people how to use
these Technologies and but and it's so
frustrating to see that it doesn't take
place near home okay and it doesn't take
near homes because what happens now and
hopefully uh uh soon uh this will be
gone and my hope is that Israel will be
able to help in the agriculture Gaza
need agriculture flourishing agriculture
industry and that I hope that Israel
will be able to assist it we we talked
about Israel's Reliance on on foreign
workers for its agricultural sector
rights groups have criticized the
working conditions that they experienced
that was before uh the War Began now
they're warning that they're at risk of
exploitation what what do you make of of
of those criticism this won't happen I
think uh Israel have a very strict rules
about uh dealing a treating of foreign
workers they're very liberal uh uh
they're very social uh these rule are
going to be kept and I tell you
something else on the psychology level
people in Israel are so
appreciative to those worker who decided
not to go home but to stay with Israel
to help in the Agriculture and did it to
some extent uh not for money but but for
solidarity and it just makes no sense to
treat these workers badly when they uh
when they did something so uh uh so nice
and so so uh supportive to Israel so I I
doubt that this will happen you you
talked Professor about people
volunteering to work in the agriculture
sector but there's a short full of what
30,000 workers among them the
Palestinians who are now banned from
entering Israel I mean can can that
number be made up can can it cannot
replace it cannot replace the labor
force that Israel had before the war
absolutely it's more a gesture made by
the citizen it helps a it helps somewhat
but not uh it cannot bring back the
situation to what was before uh and and
there were that's why the uh the sector
is uh in a
Slowdown uh but as I said I mean at the
moment the war is over uh these workers
will go come back to Israel okay and uh
uh the sector will revive itself very
quickly Professor many thanks indeed for
being with us on counting the cost now
Israel Siege uh Relentless bombing and
ground operations have upended all
manner of life in Gaza Human Rights
Watch released video of satellite
imagery showing the destruction of
orchards green houses and farmland in
the northern part of the strip it says
the damaged compounds concerns about
food insecurity and lost livelihoods
Israel has cut off food water and fuel
supplies to the already besieged strip
since the beginning of the war aid
deliveries are limited and the
humanitarian situation is catastrophic
to know more about this do watch our
previous editions of counting the cost
where we detailed the crippling cost of
the war for Gaza at its
residence now when geopolitical tensions
rise investers tend to put their money
into safe havens like gold the yellow
metal is looking hot right now as the
war on Gaza escalates but the cost of
oil is also sensitive to events in the
Middle East yet after an attack on an
American warship and Commercial vessels
in the southern Red Sea it's changed
very little in value prices could go up
though if the wall widens across the
region and disrupt supplies oil prices
have swung wildly in recent months
despite attempts by Major producers to
shore up the market they've recently
agreed once again to deepen voluntary
cuts to output for the first quarter of
2024 the total curbs amount to more than
2 million barrels per day including a
rolling over of previous cuts by Saudi
Arabia and Russia OPEC plus has also
invited Brazil to join the group but
countries struggling with a high cost of
living like the US want to ease prices
the Nations pumped a record 13 million
barrels a day into the market now Brent
crude the international Benchmark
rallied after OPEC plus Cuts were
announced but then lost more than 2%
trading near $80 a barrel last week
that's well below a year high of almost
$96 a barrel in September prices were
expected to surpass $100 a barrel in the
past two months but despite output
reductions by oil producers they've whip
sored in in the70s oil prices hit more
than $120 a barrel last year after
Russia invaded Ukraine the international
monetary fund says that Saudi Arabia
needs to earn nearly $86 a barrel to
fund an ambitious overhaul of its
economy from Dubai we're joined Now by
Jil Ahmad Jam is Chief Market Analyst at
global trading and brokerage Corporation
good to have you with us Jam so we've
got a war in the Middle East and yet oil
prices have hardly moved what's going on
it's exactly that Adrian essentially
look after the terrible events that
started on October 7 we did have an
initial $9 to $10 spike in the oil price
over the next tradeing week or so but
since then we've now dropped more than
$20 and we're now heading towards below
70 US Dollars which is the lowest level
since early July there's a few different
reasons for this firstly no matter how
difficult and tragic these events are
taking place it is not in an area of
high economic activity nor in an area of
high exports so we can compare the 2023
crisis which is taking place now against
the 2022 events of Russia and Ukraine
it's completely different so we can't
say it's Apple for Apple nonetheless
another factor is that institutional and
asset managers have always been on the
side of the coin that no new entrance or
new theme to The Conflict will be
getting involved creating more of a
supply issue and more than one month on
that call has very much proved correct
because we have dropped as much as2 us
since that impact following the event in
October 7th now OPEC plus has repeatedly
cut production as we said um another
voluntary reduction announced last week
and yet markets have hardly budged on
that news either why OPEC and OPEC plus
it sounds very good on Headline but
typically it's always been seen as a
dysfunctional group with a lack of unity
and a lack of compliance I give you a
couple of different examples of this
following the OPEC plus meeting which
firstly was postponed abruptly and then
it was scheduled just a couple of days
later the announcement was that yes
we're going to extend the production
Cuts but all individual members who
comply with this will be announcing
their statements their figures
separately this automatically results in
even more signs of a lack of unity a
lack of a clear message and essentially
yes OPEC and OPEC plus do control as
much as 90% of oil reserves and 60% of O
production but until you get those clear
consistent and standardized messages
from the group financial markets do not
see it as something that we can
typically always believe because again
the lack of compliance is there for us
to see if we also had some other
standardization where all different
members have different price points for
exports for government revenues and so
forth so basically we have a number of
different conflicts of interest taking
place as well which is why despite OPEC
plus having such a huge market share its
longer term impact on financial market
oil price specifically in this example
is not that much material unless we do
have consistent messages provided from
the group and how significant is is
Brazil being invited to join OPEC
plus it's significant from Headline
Brazil is one of the top 10 producers of
the commodity it's also a large import
of the commodity as well but again I'll
give you some of the historical context
here OPEC was seen as initially 13
different members the establishment of
OPEC plus added a further 11 members to
that group and now Brazil if it becomes
a member and of an observer which again
is not clear at the stage would make it
12 but until we see that Unity the
consistency and that all members have
equal votes equal distribution and they
have equal interests at heart it will
not mean that much over the longer term
there are concerns J over um slower
demand from China how much of a problem
for OPEC plus is production in the US
which which is is ramping up it was the
initial concern if we look back back
towards the oil price crash that started
roughly 10 years ago that was the major
reason why it was that us was set to
take up more of the storm it was set to
become the world's largest producer and
exporter of the commodity which in fact
2022 data from the Energy Information
agency actually proved that was going to
be the case and again we do have
concerns as well about slowing global
economic growth you pointed out China
which are the major import of the
commodity but as we head into 2024 we
still have a number of different global
economic health issues first ly
uncertain Central Bank policy and
inflation projections which are all
Weighing on global economic growth we
have also not yet seen the true impact
of the sharpest shift higher in interest
rate policy that many of us have seen in
our generation until we get the signals
and we are starting to see the
indications that Global central banks in
developed world the US Federal Reserve
which of course controls us interest
rate policy European Central Bank for
Europe the bank of England for the UK
and so forth until we start getting the
signals coming through that they're
really going to start cutting interest
interest rates into 2024 we do see more
concerns prevailing about global
economic growth which is why supply and
demand is still an issue all right J St
stay with us thanks for that but I I
want to talk to you about gold which
we'll turn our attention to now as you
can see the precious metal jumped in
price by more than 3% on December 4th to
a record of more than
$2,135 an ounce before pairing some of
those gains that's more than the
previous all-time high it set in August
2020 when the coronavirus pandemic
boosted uh Safe Haven demand uh gold
prices have risen by more than 10% so
far this year so uh Jam gold never has
been this expensive is it just about
current geopolitical tension or is there
something else going on here we have a
number of different uncertainties in the
world geopolitical tensions on multiple
fronts global economic health concerns
how developed and emerging economies are
handled in the high interest rate policy
and we do see reasons why gold Still
Remains in demand even though it has
fallen from that $2,100 record high just
a few days ago it's still above
$2,000 and we also see signals that the
central banks are holding gold we see
the largest increases in Gold uh
allocations for roughly 70 years and I
do think it comes down to global
economic health concerns uncertainty as
to where the world is heading and then
other economic projections as well
Central Bank policy and supply and
demand how economies are going to
continer to handle High interest rates
we still have a number of complexities
which is why as a safe haven gold Still
Remains as an Investor's best friend all
right J that so that's gold let's turn
our attention now to bitcoin which has
surged to its highest price in nearly 20
months the world's largest crypto
currency has surpassed
$44,000 marking a
150% increase this year the value of the
digital coin has plunged to as low as
$177,000 after a series of interest rate
hikes by by the US Federal Reserve the
collapse of FTX one of the biggest
crypto companies has also pushed uh the
price down uh so jabil is uh Bitcoin
making a
comeback it very much appears to be the
case is that early Christmas present and
somewhat of a Sant ready if we look back
on what Bitcoin was priced at one year
ago was
$16,000 so we're now approaching close
to three times that value just one year
later uh nonetheless we passed some
psychological resistance levels 30,000
$3 35,000 $40,000 earlier this week as
you see Traders and investors are very
quick to price and further gains we need
to see if we can hold on to that $45,000
us handle I do think that the momentum
stock is somewhat exhausted because
we've had a huge move over just a couple
of trading weeks but there are signs of
cryptocurrencies being more widely
adopted there are expectations that an
exchange traded fund will be presented
and created by one of the leading asset
managers which does suggest from a fixed
income and different investor level that
a much more sophisticated and seasoned
investor will be able to invest in
cryptocurrencies which is why Bitcoin is
really in the fever right now J many
thanks indeed for being with us on
County of the coast really good to talk
to
you now one of the main attractions of a
job is usually how much an employee is
paid but a growing number of workers are
now prioritizing environmental goals
over salaries so-called climate quitters
are ready to turn down a recruitment
offer or resign if their employer
doesn't commit to climate action the
trend is particularly growing in the UK
where consulting company KPMG has
recently conducted a survey of 6,000
people it found that environmental
social and governance or ESG factors are
influencing employment decisions for
almost half of British office workers
the study says that Millennials and
young workers are driving the climate
quitting Trend seeking out a more
environmentally friendly job 20% of
respondents have turned down job offers
if the company didn't demonstrate
climate and social commitments while 51%
of 2,000 students surveyed globally by
the Yale School of Management said that
they would accept lower salaries to work
for an environmentally responsible
company the International Energy agency
says that more people were employed by
Clean energy companies than by fossil
fuel ones this year let's get back to
Dubai from there we're joined by John
malli head of Global Environmental
social and govern Ence at KPMG
International good to have you with us
John apart from being environmentally
conscious what is is it that's
motivating these employees to quit or
not accept a job in the first place and
are they mostly younger
workers our research shows that almost
half of the uh UK workers of what I'll
be clear and saying all ages are basing
their employment decisions on
environmental but also social
considerations now this is particularly
true uh among Millennial and gen Z
employees where the figure Rises to more
than half but I I just want to be really
clear in stating that this is not uh it
is not just about climate uh for example
for Gen z a whoin 92% of them place an
Importance of Being able to link their
own values and their own Purpose with
that of the organizations that they work
for young professionals want to work for
and indeed they want to achieve uh goals
which go beyond profit alone
now uh interestingly what we've seen in
our research that younger workers say
between 18 and 34 um most of them uh
they're primarily interested in Fair pay
commitments whilst the the next bracket
up uh those uh between 35 and 44 um they
are most focused on environmental impact
of the company's uh uh work that they do
and there are other considerations uh
such as broader ethical considerations
uh um also taken we've seen through the
data I I would just clarify very quickly
that our data shows the key factors
guiding where employees choose to work
today and indeed in the future with 20%
of adults uh um and 30% of the 18 to 24
brackets turning down job offers as you
mentioned is is this phenomenon
affecting companies and that it's it's
forcing them in a way to change their
environmental policies and and are there
any particular sectors that that are
being being affected more than others
yeah yes indeed there there's a a strong
uh sector related data that we see
coming through uh so for climate um uh
for example this resonates more in what
we call the hard to Abate sectors so uh
hearing we see at 24% said that they
would not uh work in mining 23% would
not work in in oil and gas and 21% uh
would not work in petrochemicals uh but
this this is not just about climate I
said it before I'll say it again uh the
two most common sectors in which
correspondents uh sorry respondents said
they would not work in are um much more
Social and Health focused uh so for
example 24% said they would not work in
the alcohol sector and we see that
42% said they would not work uh in the
tobacco sector and John as we transition
towards more uh renewable energy uh
suppliers I mean could could that
transform the job market uh yes indeed
absolutely so as we transition uh what
we see is uh emerging Tech Technologies
emerging areas so you talked about
renewable energy onshore wind offshore
wind Technologies around this such as
carbon capture carbon storage and so on
all of these will lead to new jobs a new
set of skills and we absolutely see at
young people coming through who are
passionate about this agenda wanting to
work in these areas and we absolutely
see that transforming the jobs Market uh
in the future John it's been really good
to talk to you on counting the cost many
thanks indeed for being with us and
that's our show for this week if you'd
like to comment on anything that you've
seen you can get in touch with us by
tweeting me on X that still sounds
awkward I'm at a finigan on X try to
remember to use the hash AJ CC when you
do or you could drop us a line counting
the cost at al.net is our email address
as always there's plenty more for you
online at al.com CC that takes you
straight to our page and there you'll
find individual reports links and entire
episodes for you to catch up
on but that's it for this edition of
counting the cost I'm Adrien finigan
from the team here in Doha thanks for
being with us the news on Al era is
[Music]
next